1. How to design your art assets for Physically Based Rendering

Tri-Ace R&D, Yoshiharu Gotanda

These are notes on the slides found here.

http://research.tri-ace.com/Data/cedec2012_FlowForPBR.pptx

The intent is to submit them to Tri-Ace after proof-reading.

The numbers refer to the corresponding slide number.



2. Agenda

Physically based visuals Creating Textures Diffuse Albedo Map Normal Map Reflectance Map
Shininess Map IBL Texture Textures for ad-hoc rendering

4. What’s a physically based visual?

It’s not just about physically based rendering and shading. It’s not just about
photorealism. It’s part of photorealism. It’s about making a compelling visual. Artists
have to be able to control it.

5.

It’s not good enough to have good shaders A high quality visual is something that is
determined by the skill of the artists There’s a certain knack to producing physical art
assets. Convincing representations of materials and textures have to be made with
knowledge of physical constraints.

6. Checklist 1

Is rendering done in linear space? Even if the asset is correctly made, it won’t render
right unless in linear space.

Is tone mapping done correctly? Even if linear, things won’t make sense without proper
tone mapping.

7. Checklist 2

Are textures in the correct color space? The appropriate color space must be chosen
according to the texture type. Textures can be converted to linear when rednering, or the
texture itself can be in a linear color space.

8. Checklist 3

Is there a physical base shader? If you have it, you’re golden. If you don’t you will have
less expressive power, but you can still get by.

9. What makes Physically based visuals?

you have to make textures, material parameters, lighting

10. Textures

for traditional ad hoc shaders the usual parameters have a look at the rendering, and
adjust in Photoshop until things look right.

for physically based shaders Textures have physical meanings. BRDF model parameters are
stored in the texture What goes in the texture is determined when the shaders are created


11. Texture correspondences

Ad hoc shading vs. Physical

Color Maps (the image is designed). vs. Diffuse Albedo map (texture represents diffuse
reflectivity)

Normal Maps, Height, Displacement Maps. Same; representing geometric shape at mesa-scale.

Gloss Map (adjust size of specular highlights) vs. Shininess, Glossiness, Roughness;
representing microscale geometry

Specular Map (specular strength) vs. Reflectance Map (a value that replaces refractive
index of object reflectivity)

Fresnel map; no correspondence - the effects Fresnel models are part of the BRDF

13. Diffuse Albedo Map 1 

Texture can be considered the most important of the material
parameters In some extreme cases, you might not need any, but in such cases of a single
color over the object, normal maps, shininess, and AO maps will be more important.

Conventional textures are merely pictures.

14. Diffuse Albedo Map 2

There is a range of plausible values and physical constraints when physically representing
an element’s diffuse reflectivity. Set the range as you like such that the specular is
balanced.

At a certain size, metals don’t require a diffuse component, and using the default
specular is not a problem.

15. Diffuse Albedo Map 3

16. Making Diffuse Albedo maps 

These maps can be captured by a camera; it’s easy if the
correct exposure is used. Removing specularity is a challenge.

Manually painting is possible if realistic values are used. Values can be researched on
the web, but use those values with caution. If the values are realistic an artist can draw
freely.

17. Using a photograph to make a diffuse albedo map

Lighting is critical. If directivity is too strong use a diffuser or multiple lights.

Remove the bias from the spectrum, whether it is natural light, or tungsten, correctly set
the color temperature.


18. Color calibration. 

Use a Macbeth (X-rite) color chart. It’s easy to use for
calibration because the values are published. Automatic calibration is possible. For more
info,

Color Checker Passport Implementation in Far Cry 3
http://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2012-shading-course/mcauley/
s2012_pbs_farcry3_slides.pdf
http://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2012-shading-course/mcauley/
s2012_pbs_farcry3_notes.pdf


19. Left - calibrated, right - uncalibrated

20. Making Albedo Maps from photographs

Camera settings: RAW. No color correction. Linear (gamma 1.0) You don’t need to shoot HDR.
(under the photograph) Is it really an albedo map? Careful!

21. Specular Removal

The specular has to be removed, because a physically based renderer is going to supply it
from the material roughness. There are exceptions, when the specular needs to be higher
than the theoretical specular; for example when rendering low-contrast video that needs to
be whitish under white light sources.

22. PL Polarizing filters remove some specular by themselves. The difference between a
filtered and unfiltered image can also be used to manually remove specular. A tool might
be able to automatically remove the lighting environment. It can be manually done by
adjusting the look and guessing.

23. PL Filters

PL filters are often used to take clean pictures of the sea or sky. The filter is most
useful vs a 45 degree angle of reflection, and a 90 degree scattering angle. They are
effective in removing glare and reflection. PL filters filter light by not passing phases
of light that are not aligned with the slits in the filter. A 56 degree angle (1.5
refractive index) filters glass against air for example.

24. Brewster angle 

Polarized light is reflected at the boundary surface at different angles
depending on refractive index.

25. Left with filter, right without PL filter 
26. Left, PL filter maximum effect, right, minimum
27. What about rough surfaces? 11% difference in energy distribution, it might be 30% if very
rought. Left PL filter maximum effect, right - minimum

28. Automatic specular removal Limited automatic removal can be achieved if the
environment is providing isoluminant colors, for example as might be provided from a
hemispherical light. In practice, equally spaced light sources around a hemisphere can be
removed if you can guess the specular contribution. You’d use the BRDF model to remove a
minute amount of specular, but it’s difficult because you also need automatic estimation
of the roughness. Images with and without a PL filter can be used to estimate roughness.

29. Complications include multi-layer materials, and materials such as metal which have a
wavelength dependent refractive index.

Some special conditions like flat surfaces allow the removal of specular in photoshop.

30. What about contrast and so on? It’s hard to say because of roughness. When inspecting
by eye, specular appearance changes depending on viewing angle. Look at images captured
with and without a PL filter.

31. Using a PL filter to remove specular 

Picking an angle to shoot that makes removal easy might not be possible. What to do? 

32. Use this bit! 
33. left without adjustment, right with adjustment 
34. Preparing for comparison, shoot the color chart so that the true values can be
referenced in sRGB space. Note that there is also specular on the chart! Having a familiar
reference helps. From the albedo, high saturation values can be provided for a Lambert
shader.

35. Realistic diffuse reflectance range runs from about 1% for black to 90% for white, or
2-230 in RGB. in sRGB, 32-243. 18% gray is approximately 200 in sRGB.

36. On the left is a albedo texture created for an ad hoc renderer. On the right is a
carefully constructed texture for a physically based renderer.

38. Normal maps can be produced in the usual way because it is a modeling operation. 
39. Low
quality height maps can be produced in photoshop, but it is easy to produce shading errors
that way. It’s better to produce the maps in 3d; sculpt tools typically automatically
produce the normal maps.

41. Reflectance maps 1

Reflectance maps are a texture that directly expresses a vertical specular reflectance.
Reflectance maps indirectly express the material’s refractive index. If the imaginary
component of the refractive index is not zero, approximations such as Schlick cannot
correctively represent the result. However, the difference is slight.

43. Be careful, not all the math you find on the web is right. Seb Lagarde’s page is a good
reference. 
44. In a non-dielectric material there is virtually no change in refractive index
vs wavelength. A grey scale texture is sufficient. For metallic materials, use a color
map.

45. graph - red: quartz, green: gold, blue: titanium dioxide, pink: sapphire table: Samples of
refractive index near 550nm iron 2.7-3.33i ferric oxide 3.01 gold 0.4-2.54i silver
0.12-3.34i copper 1.04-2.59i quartz 1.46 Sapphire 1.66 water 1.33 ivory 1.54 carbon
2.0-1.0i

Reference scalar samples, iron, gold, copper.

47. Shininess map

Also a modelling map (like normals) although the scale is different. This texture
represents microfacets.

This texture is particularly important for physically based shading.

48. Left, shininess map, right no shininess map.

49. Left Microfacet angles, right, average surface angles 
50. Shininess map 
51. Shininess is treated differently by every renderer 
52. Making a shininess map 
You only have to adjust the
appearance when you manually create a shiness map. A glossiness chart can be useful. Refer
to Seb lagarde’s article:
http://seblagarde.wordpress.com/2012/04/30/dontnod-specular-and-glossiness-chart/

53. Specular highlihgts and surface light sources

Highlight differences depend on the light itself. A light that is close to the surface
affects the size of the highlight. Strength of the highlight depends on the light source’s
brightness. The highlight is greater if microfacets pick up a small light sources.
Highlights weaken due to conservation of energy.

54. Left: Specular shape for low shininess illuminated by a point source. Right High shininess
specular response.

55. Upper left, middle size light source, upper right large light source, lower left, middle
shininess, lower right, small shininess

56. Shininess has to be done in the shader. See the shader hack for image based lighting in
the CEDEC 2011 paper on implementation. That shows a realtime specular GI solution. We
really do need the next generation of GPU though to get to techniques like virutal point
lights, and cone tracing in sparse voxel octrees. That technique can only handle a glossy
specular, but it is quite realistic.

57. Modifying shininess by noise map No realistic material is completely flat. We can increase
quality with a noise map.

58. left no noise, right noise. 
59. Add about three layers of noise in Photoshop. Use a procedural
noise if it’s available. 
60. left to right, a little noise, a bit more, a lot

61. Procedural Shininess maps 

Since a shininess map is a geometry map, we should be able to
generate it automatically. It’s accurate, and physical. It also provides anti-aliasing.
see: “Rock-Solid Shading: Image Stability without Sacrificing Detail”
http://advances.realtimerendering.com/s2012/index.html Scale is the difference between a
normal map and a shininess map.
http://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2012-shading-course/hoffman/

62. Think of normal and shininess as geometry LOD. Left geo, middle normals, right shininess

63. LEAN mapping is done in the shader + mipmapping (bilinear filtering) using the integral of
the specular (exp) Beckmann Blinn-Phong instead of (cos). LEAN texture mapping has 5
elements (x, y, x^2, xy, y^2) and requires some math in the shader for processing. A CLEAN
map is a simplified version with three elements (x, y, x^2+y^2)

64. LEAN and CLEAN maps have a high shader cost. As an alternative, shininess could be stored
as A in the normal map. It could also be generated in the anisotropic case by encoding
R=X, G=Y, B= shininessU, A = shininessV

65. You could also consider a Toksvig map; shininess is generated by the following formula
using the length of the normal generated from averaging mipmaps. (equation). This
technique is used in Far Cry 3. see
http://blog.selfshadow.com/publications/s2012-shading-course/mcauley/
s2012_pbs_farcry3_slides.pdf

66. Shininess values can be generated using non-linear least-squares. 
67. Normal map -> derived shininess maps 
68. left procedural shininess, right no procedural shininess, just plain old
mipmaps

69. Importance of shininess maps 

It’s usually implemented to only affect specular, but in
reality it affects diffuse as well. The importance of the map is enhanced if Oren-Nayar is
used.

72. Generating IBL textures 

Photos can be used, they can be drawn by hand. Global Illumination
can be used to generate lighting from the scene to a static map.


73. Shoot HDR only. Use a fisheye lens and a mirror ball. These accessories are readily
available. This method allows you to easily obtain realistic illumination. What the
relationship between exposure and light intensity. If physically based lighting is not
being used, adjustments have to be done visually.

74. All about IBL Use a tool like Photoshop, edit in HDR. Use a linear color space. While
drawing, adjust the exposure. Create a cube map. The environment can provide a lot of
benefits, but it can require a lot of adjustment.

75. Results from a dynamic scene 

Generating environment maps from the scene in realtime is
possible. Preprocess and map generation and calculating radiance maps can take a long
time. The runtime cost is high but it is possible in the current generation. In the next
generation two or more bounces might be practical. Animation and changes in the
environment as might be seen in racing games require accurate updates.

76. The IBL texture can be precomputed from the scene, to eliminate the cost of generating it.
There can be multiple IBL maps. GI approach: High resolution IBL, IBL considers the
bounce. GI accuracy depends on the number of IBL and can feel fake.

77. No bounce, no IBL 
78. 1 bounce 
79. 2 bounce 
80. 6 bounce 
81. 4 bounce Image based GI

83. Disadvantages of physically based rendering

Subject to physical constraints Compatibility with stylized NPR rendering Layered
materials might not be supported Coordination of look with ad hoc shaders Selection of
physical properties might be a problem

84. Ad hoc physical renderer 

An ad hoc renderer is to some extent physical.

Balance diffuse albedo and specular. Balance gloss map and specular map. Use specular
color Use Fresnel


85. Ad hoc albedo map 

The following points are the same as for physical rendering.

Contains 1/pi of Lambert shader? 0.318 times has not been included. Specular and diffuse
are related by conservation of energy (increase and decrease them relative to each other)
If there’s some kind of reverse Fresnel shader it’s value will also be multiplied against
diffuse.

86. Just like in the physically based case, a metallic material can have the diffuse turned
off. Without ambient and GI being handled properly, it’ll be completely black except for
the specular. If so, add diffuse.

87. Ad hoc gloss map 

Normalized specular coefficient is proportional to shininess A simple
method would be to also use this map as a specular gloss map. The balance of specular and
diffuse collapses if there is a scale factor, such as a specular map. If you have a 1/pi
in the diffuse, gloss = spec intensity map * 0.125. If you don’t have 1/pi in the diffuse,
gloss specular intensity map * 0.125 * pi

88. Ad hoc specular map 

Balance the diffuse map against the specular, as well as gloss. Shader
parameters can also be adjusted. Sum of both of the reflectances should not exceed one.
It’s difficult for an artist to adjust the sum of the integral rather than the sum of the
parameters though. Perhaps a plugin would help.

89. Ad hoc Fresnel 

Fresnel shader is always on. ... Fresnel values can be calculated from the
refractive index obtained from physics. Charts and helper plugins can be used.

90. Summary 

A physical renderer can save you from the hassle of adjusting parameters on an ad
hoc shader. Manual adjustment of the base scene (environmental light source) is minimized.
Tips and constraints on texture parameters and generation were presented, as well as when
to ignore the constraints. Physical principles can be the basis of convincing
photorealistic renders.









